Practical Bash Usage – Example 1
In this example, we want to find all the
subdomains listed
on the main megacorpone.com web page and
find their corresponding IP addresses.
Doing this manually would be frustrating
and time consuming,
but with some basic Bash commands, we can
turn this into an easy task.
We’ll start by downloading the index page
with wget:
Manually scanning the file, we see many
lines we don’t need.
Let’s start narrowing in on lines that we
need, and strip out lines we don’t.
First, we can use grep to extract all the
lines in index.html
that contain HTML links by searching for
href=
This beta subdomain is a prime example of
what we’re looking for.
Now let’s use grep to grab lines that contain
“.megacorpone”,
indicating the existence of a subdomain…
…and grep -v to strip away lines that
contain
the boring “www” subdomain we already
know about:
This output looks closer to what we need.
By reducing our data in a logical way
and making sequentially smaller
reductions with each pass,
we are in the midst of the most common
cycle in data handling.
It looks like each line contains a link,
and a subdomain,
but we need to get rid of the extra HTML
around our links.
There are always multiple approaches to
any task performed in Bash,
but we’ll use a little-known approach for
this.
We will use the -F option of awk to set a
multi-character delimiter…
…and we will set our delimiter to http://
We then tell awk we want the second field,
or everything after our delimiter,
returned.
The beginning of each line in our output
shows that we’re on the right track.
Now, we can use cut to set the delimiter
to a forward slash…
…and print the first field... …leaving us
with only the full subdomain name:
If we were to criticize our work in an
effort to improve
(which we should always do),
we might see some simple ways to
streamline this exercise.
First, we began our search with “href=”
and later searched for http://.
These are both essentially links,
but this requires that every line contain
both strings.
If a line only had one of the strings,
but not both, we would have missed it.
Redundancy like this should be avoided,
especially when working with large files.
In addition, we don’t necessarily care
about links.
We are looking for subdomains ending in
“.megacorpone.com”
regardless of whether or not the
reference is contained in a link.
A well-formed regular expression search
can handle this scenario easily.
This solution is quite compact, but
introduces some new techniques.
First, notice the grep -o option,
which only returns the string defined in
our regular expression.
The expression itself looks complex but
is fairly straight-forward.
The string we are searching for is
wrapped in single-quotes, which,
as we mentioned, will not allow variable
expansions and will treat
all enclosed characters literally.
The first block in the expression is a
negated set that searches
for any number of characters not
including a forward-slash.
Notice that the periods are escaped with
a backslash
to reinforce that we are looking for a
literal period.
Next, the string must end with
“.megacorpone.com”.
When grep finds a matching string, it
will carve it from the line and return it.
Now we have a nice, clean list of domain
names
linked from the front page of
megacorpone.com.
We could have done more with this regular
expression, but it’s a great start
and a good example of why regular
expressions are so valuable.
Next, we will use the host command to
discover the corresponding IP address
of each domain name in our text file.
We can use a Bash one-liner loop for this.
The host command gives us all sorts of
output and not all of it is relevant.
We will extract the IP addresses by
piping the output into a grep
for “has address" then cut the results
and sort them.
Nice! We’ve extracted the
“.megacorpone.com” subdomains
from the web page and obtained the
corresponding IP addresses.